# Build Instructions

These instructions for building the Gunyah Hypervisor can be used for both local builds or building within a Docker container.

## Build Environment

Ensure your build environment is correctly setup. See [Setup Instructions](setup.md).

Always ensure you have activated the `gunyah-venv` *before* running `configure` or building.
```bash
. gunyah-venv/bin/activate
```

## Download the source code

The following repositories are needed to build a Gunyah Hypervisor image:

- [Gunyah Hypervisor](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-hypervisor) - The Gunyah Hypervisor.
 ```bash
 git clone https://github.com/quic/gunyah-hypervisor.git
 ```
- [Resource Manager](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-resource-manager) - The privileged root VM and VM manager supporting the Gunyah Hypervisor.
 ```bash
 git clone https://github.com/quic/gunyah-resource-manager.git
 ```
- [Gunyah C Runtime](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-c-runtime) - A runtime for light-weight OS-less application VMs.
 ```bash
git clone https://github.com/quic/gunyah-c-runtime.git
 ```

## Build Configuration

The build system has several configuration parameters that must be set:

* `platform`: selects the target hardware platform;
* `featureset`:  selects a named set of enabled features; and
* `quality`: specifies the build quality, e.g. `debug`, `production` etc, which affect compilation of runtime assertions, compiler optimisations etc.

These parameters must be set on the build system's command line; if one or more of them is left unset, the build system will print the known values for the missing parameter and abort. You may specify a comma-separated list to select multiple values for a parameter, or `all` to select every known value. You may also specify `all=true`, which is equivalent to specifying `all` for every parameter that is not otherwise specified. The when multiple options are selected, each combination (variant) will be built in separate output directories under the `build` directory.

Each project may be build using `ninja` or `scons` and the process for build configuration depends on the selected build tool used. See the sections below.

## Building

The Gunyah Hypervisor, Resource Manager and C runtime are built separately, each following the same build instructions below. These will be packages together into a final boot image.

> IMPORTANT! If making hypervisor public API changes, these changes need to be added to the Resource Manager and libc Runtime.

### Building with Ninja

To configure the build for using *Ninja*, run `./configure.py <configuration>`, specifying the configuration parameters.

For example, in each of the Gunyah Hypervisor, Resource Manager and Gunyah C Runtime checkouts, run:
```sh
./configure.py platform=qemu featureset=gunyah-rm-qemu quality=production
```

or to build all available configurations for QEMU:
```sh
./configure.py platform=qemu all=true
```

This will create a `build` directory and Ninja build rules file for each enabled build variant. Generally, the `configure` step only needs to be run once.

Run `ninja` to build. There is usually no need to specify `-j` or similar, as Ninja will select this automatically. Ninja also will incrementally re-build if run again after making code changes.
> Note, if configuration files are modified, Ninja will rerun the configuration tool with the previous parameters. However, you must manually rerun the configuration step if you rename or delete an existing module or configuration parameter, as Ninja will refuse to run if a build configuration file is missing.

To build a specific file (for example, a single variant when multiple variants have been configured), specify its full name as the target on the `ninja` command line.

To clean the build, run `ninja -t clean`. It should not be necessary to do this routinely.

### Building with SCons

To perform a standalone SCons build, run `scons`, specifying the configuration parameters. For example, to build debug builds of all available feature sets for the QEMU:

```sh
scons platform=qemu featureset=all quality=debug
```

Note, configuration parameters *must* be specified on every SCons build; they will not be cached.

To clean the build, run `scons -c all=true`, or use configuration parameters to select a specific variant to clean. It should not be necessary to do this routinely.

## Producing a Boot Image

Once you have built the Gunyah Hypervisor, Resource Manager and C Runtime, a boot image can be prepared.

The individual executables generated by building [Gunyah Hypervisor](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-hypervisor), [Resource Manager](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-resource-manager), and [Gunyah C Runtime](https://github.com/quic/gunyah-c-runtime) need to be integrated into a single `hypvm.elf` boot image.

You will need the [pyelftools](https://github.com/eliben/pyelftools) Python module, available from its upstream project:
```bash
cd <tools-directory>
git clone https://github.com/eliben/pyelftools.git
```

To generate `hypvm.elf` boot image run these steps (substituting `<path>`s for each tool / executable):
```bash
cd <path-to-gunyah-hypervisor-src>
PYTHONPATH=<path-to-pyelftools>/pyelftools tools/elf/package_apps.py \
 -a <path-to-resource-manager-src>/build/resource-manager \
 -r <path-to-c-runtime-src>/build/runtime \
 <path-to-gunyah-hypervisor-src>/build/qemu/gunyah-rm-qemu/production/hyp.elf \
 -o <path-to-destination>/hypvm.elf
```
> Note, you may wish to pick a different hypervisor `hyp.elf` from a different build variant (i.e. `build/qemu/gunyah-rm-qemu/production/`).
